.\" Manpage for fern.
.\" Contact andie@bugwhisperer.dev to correct errors or typos.
.TH FERN 1 "01 Aug 2025" "0.1.7" "FERN MANUAL"

.SH NAME
fern \- a knowledge management system

.SH SYNOPSIS
fern COMMAND [ACTION [ARGS...]]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B fern
is a swiss-army knife for your notetaking and personal knowledge management.
Fern is a helpful commandline tool to manage, curate, and search a vault of your personal notes.
It offers an alternative to heavier GUI personal notetaking management applications for systems that are resource constrained or for users that value the privacy and security of their data.
.PP
Fern uses markdown for all Notes, Templates, and Journal records.
Users are NOT required to pass the '.md' extension when referencing the name of a given Note/Journal/Template as an parameter argument, as Fern will check for and append it, if needed.
.PP
.I NOTE:
Fern requires the environment variable \fB$FERN_VAULT\fR to be assessable and set as the valid, existing path to your Fern vault before it is able to run commands (other than help-related ones).

.SH COMMANDS
.SS
.I help
View basic information and guidance on using Fern quickly from the commandline.
.TP
.B ACTIONS
.TP
~~ NONE ~~

.SS
.I vault
Main folder that holds all Fern records.
.TP
.B ACTIONS
.TP
create <path>
.RS
Sets up a new Fern Vault.
.I NOTE:
The <path> argument folder for the new Vault must not already exist.
.RE

.TP
stat
.RS
Get a list of stats for Fern Vault like qty of records per area.
.RE

.SS
.I find
Search across both Notes and Journals for matching patterns.
.TP
.B ACTIONS
.TP
<pattern> [--verbose|-v] [--quiet|-q] [--notes|-n] [--journals|-j]
.RS
Searches through both Notes and Journals for matches to a given RegEx pattern.
By default, provides interactive file selection from search results.
The '--verbose' or '-v' flag shows matching lines with context and disables interactive mode.
The '--quiet' or '-q' flag shows file list without interactive selection.
The '--notes' or '-n' flag restricts search to Notes only.
The '--journals' or '-j' flag restricts search to Journals only.
If neither '--notes' nor '--journals' is specified, both are searched.
.RE

.SS
.I bookmark
View and manage Bookmarks of Notes.
.TP
.B ACTIONS
.TP
list
.RS
Lists out all Bookmarks to std output.
.RE

.TP
add <note_name>
.RS
Adds a single Note to Bookmarks. Note name passed must exist in the Notes folder.
.RE

.TP
del <note_name>
.RS
Removes a single Note from Bookmarks.
.RE

.SS
.I journal
Keep and view Journal entries (weekly, monthly, yearly), separate from Notes (which may represent long-term projects/ideas).
.TP
.B ACTIONS
.TP
~~ NONE ~~
.RS
Opens today's weekly Journal log (shortcut for current week).
.RE

.TP
open <{this|next|last}-{week|month|year}>
.RS
Opens a Journal entry for a specific time period. Creates the Journal if it doesn't exist yet.
Options include: this-week, next-week, last-week, this-month, next-month, last-month, this-year, next-year, last-year.
.RE

.TP
open <YYYY-MM-DD>
.RS
Opens a weekly Journal entry for the week containing the specified date.
.RE

.TP
review
.RS
Opens the previous month's Journal logs (monthly log and all weekly logs from that month) for review.
.RE

.TP
find <pattern> [--verbose|--quiet]
.RS
Searches through Journal entries for matches to a given RegEx pattern.
By default, provides interactive file selection from search results.
The '--verbose' flag shows matching lines with context and disables interactive mode.
The '--quiet' flag shows file list without interactive selection.
.RE

.SS
.I note
Note records form the core of the knowledge base, tracking projects, books, and more. It's an intentionally open-ended, flexible base to build off of.
.TP
.B ACTIONS
.TP
add <note_name> [<template_name>]
.RS
Creates a new Note with a given name.
This action will abort if a Note already exists with the name provided.
The name of an existing template can be passed to bootstrap the new note with its comtents.
.RE

.TP
del <note_name>
.RS
Deletes a single note from the Notes folder, if found.
All existing Notes,Journals,Bookmarks,Templates that have a link or reference to the deleted Note name will be updated to read "[!]".
.RE

.TP
open <note_name>
.RS
Opens a single Note from the Notes folder, if found.
.RE

.TP
move <old_note> <new_note>
.RS
Moves/Renames a single Note in the Notes folder from the old to the new name.
All existing Notes,Journals,Bookmarks,Templates that have a link or reference to the moved Note's old name will be updated to the new name.
This action will abort if a Note record already exists in the Notes folder with the provided new name.
This was done a safety to keep users from accidentily overwriting notes.
.RE

.TP
find <pattern> [--verbose|--quiet]
.RS
Find Notes based on matching the provided search pattern (accepts RegEx).
By default, provides interactive file selection from search results.
The '--verbose' flag shows matching lines with context and disables interactive mode.
The '--quiet' flag shows file list without interactive selection.
.RE

.TP
append <template_name> [<note_name>]
.RS
Appends the contents of a template to an existing note.
If no note name is provided, the template will be appended to a default note.
.RE

.SS
.I template
Templates serve as helpful blueprints to quickly spin up Notes and Journals. Saves from repeating same contents (like specific sets of headings and subheadings). The Templates `future.log`, `monthly.log`, and `weekly.log` are required to exist and are created as part of the Fern Vault setup process.
.TP
.B ACTIONS
.TP
list
.RS
Displays a list of all Templates in the Templates folder.
.RE

.TP
add <template_name>
.RS
Creates a new Template with the given name.
This action will abort if a Template already exists with the name provided.
.RE

.TP
del <template_name>
delete a Template
.RS
Deletes a single Template from the Templates folder, if found.
.RE

.TP
open <template_name>
.RS
Opens a single Template from the Templates folder, if found.
.RE

.TP
move <old_template> <new_template>
.RS
Moves/Renames a single Template in the Templates folder from the old to the new name.
This action will abort if a Template record already exists in the Templates folder with the provided new name.
This was done a safety to keep users from accidentily overwriting Templates.
.RE

.SH EXAMPLES
Let's say you are a hard-working, organised PhD student in the venerable field of Foxology.

.B Start your day off right with Fern!
.PP
You start your day with a strong cup of coffee, fire up your computer and want to take a few notes about some of the top To Do items you need to get done today.
Command to use:
.PP
.nf
.RS
$ fern journal
.RE
.fi
.PP
This opens up the weekly journal for the current week, creating it if it doesn't exist.
It will be created with whatever is contained in the 'weekly.log' template file.
This is a shortcut for: `fern journal open this-week`.

.B Templating to save time
.PP
You know that you'll be needing to make a lot of Notes on various books for your research and want to save yourself from manually entering the same sections and headers in all those Notes.
Command to use:
.PP
.nf
.RS
$ fern template add book-note
.RE
.fi
.PP
This creates a new Template file 'book-note' and opens it up to be populated.

.B New Note from a Template
.PP
During your research you came across a book called, "The Habits of Foxes" that will be critical to your thesis that you want to capture this new information for later.
Command to use:
.PP
.nf
.RS
$ fern note add "The Habits of Foxes" book-note
.RE
.fi
.PP
This will create and open a new Note file with the name 'The Habits of Foxes'. It will contain everything inside the Template file 'book-note'.

.B Finding old notes
.PP
It's time to write that thesis paper, but your can't remember which of the hundreds of book notes that you made had that information on the habits of foxes.
Command to use:
.PP
.nf
.RS
$ fern note find habits
/home/andie/notes/2025-01-02
/home/andie/notes/good-habits-tracking
/home/andie/notes/The Habits of Foxes
.RE
.fi
.PP
Ah, there's the Note you needed on the last line!
You can open it up with the command:
.PP
.nf
.RS
$ fern note open "The Habits of Foxes"
.RE
.fi

.SH FILES
$HOME/.local/bin/fern

.SH LIMITATIONS
.TP
Cannot support multiple Fern vaults on a single system.

.SH BUGS
No known bugs.
Please submit any bug reports to: https://todo.sr.ht/~bugwhisperer/fern-issues

.SH AUTHOR
Writen by Andie Keller (andie@bugwhisperer.dev).

.SH COPYRIGHT
.TP
Copyright © 2025 Andie Keller.  License GPLv3+: GNU  GPL  version  3  or  later <https://gnu.org/licenses/gpl.html>.
This is free software: you are free to change and redistribute it.
There is NO WARRANTY.

.SH SEE ALSO
fern project page: https://sr.ht/~bugwhisperer/fern
fern git repository: https://git.sr.ht/~bugwhisperer/fern

